SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF PERIMENOPAUSE AND MENOPAUSE

The period of transition should serve to remind both the patients and the clinicians that this is a time for communi-cation to ensure improvements in patient awareness through education. Certainly, preventive health care education is important throughout life, but at the time of the menopause, a review of the major health issues can be especially rewarding. Besides the general issues of good health, attention is appro-priately focused on cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis.

During the transition and early postmenopausal years in particular, some women may experience significantly bothersome symptoms, whereas others show no reactions or minimal reactions that can go unnoticed. The differ-ences in menopause experience and in the spectrum and severity of symptoms across different cultures are poorly documented, and indeed, it is difficult to do so. Individual reporting is so conditioned by sociocultural factors that it is hard to determine what is due to biologic versus cultural variability.156,157 For example, there is no word to describe a hot flush in Japanese, Chinese, and Mayan.158 Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that the nature and prevalence of menopausal symptoms are common to most women and that variations among cultures and within cultures reflect not physiology, but differences in attitudes, lifestyles, socio-economic status, and individual perceptions across societ-ies.159–164 Hormone levels during the perimenopausal years vary little among different ethnic groups; differences are mainly because of varying body sizes.165

Abnormal Uterine Bleeding

Period of transition is characterized by an increasing inci-dence of anovulatory uterine bleeding. Thus, the late repro-ductive and early menopausal stages are characterized by longer periods of exposure to unopposed estrogen, of ovar-ian and extraovarian (from aromatization of androgens) ori-gins. In the SWAN study, about 20% of cycles even early in the menopausal transition were anovulatory, associated with shorter intervals at the beginning of the transition and lon-ger intervals later.166 Irregular bleeding was most often due to anovulation, whereas heavy menstrual bleeding was associ-ated with obesity and uterine abnormalities. The menopause transition and early menopause can thus be considered as times of relative estrogen excess. Although the greatest con-cern emerging from prolonged periods of exposure to estro-gen unopposed by progesterone is of endometrial neoplasia, the most common of tissue finding is that of nonneoplastic tissue displaying estrogen effects unopposed by progesterone.

In addition to relative excess of estrogen resulting from anovulation, there are four mechanisms that could result in higher endogenous estrogen levels in perimenopausal and menopausal women:

1.	Increased precursor androgen (functional endocrine tumors, liver disease, stress)

2.	Increased aromatization (obesity, hyperthyroidism, and liver disease)

3.	Increased direct secretion of estrogen (ovarian tumors)

4.	Decreased levels of SHBG (sex hormone–binding glob-ulin) leading to increased levels of free estrogen

In those presenting with abnormal uterine bleeding, whether perimenopausal or postmenopausal, whether on or off hormone therapy, specific organic causes for abnormal uterine bleeding (neoplasia, complications of unexpected pregnancy, or bleeding from extrauterine sites) must be ruled out. In addi-tion to a careful history and physical examination, abnormal uterine bleeding, particularly in an aging individual, requires systematic endometrial evaluation. Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) measurement of endometrial thickness can be utilized in postmenopausal women to avoid unnecessary biopsies.167 In postmenopausal women with abnormal bleeding, endometrial biopsy is considered unnecessary when the endometrial thick-ness on ultrasound is less than 4 mm as the risk of endometrial hyperplasia or cancer in this setting is unlikely.168–170 Substantial evidence is however lacking to support the application of this criterion to the premenopausal population. We believe that biopsy is unnecessary in postmenopausal women when the endometrial thickness is 4 mm or less. We further believe that endometrial biopsy is indicated when the clinical history suggests long-term unopposed estrogen exposure (either prolonged periods of oligo-/amenorrhea in pre- and peri-menopausal women or with iatrogenic estrogen use) even when the endometrial thickness is “normal” (5–12 mm for premenopausal women) and that biopsy should be consid-ered when endometrial thickness is greater than 12 mm in the absence of abnormal uterine bleeding, even when clini-cal suspicion of disease is low. A TVUS study can also help in identifying intracavitary lesions, particularly with intracavitary instillation of saline.171 Saline infusion sonohysterogram (SHG) can identify intracavitary lesions (i.e., polyps and submuco-sal fibroids) that can be missed on routine 2D TVUS.171 The sensitivity and specificity of TVUS for identifying intrauter-ine pathology are 56–73%,172 whereas SHG has a sensitivity of 96–100% and a negative predictive value of 94–100% in eval-uating for uterine pathology.171 Hysteroscopy has an accuracy of 96% for intracavitary pathology, with abnormalities seen in about 47% of premenopausal and postmenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding.140

If the endometrial assessment is unremarkable but abnormal bleeding persists, then for reasons of both accuracy and cost-effectiveness, the next step should be of endometrial biopsy; when no focal pathology is evident on screening, then it is appropriate for the method of endometrial biopsy to be an office-based procedure. We recommend the use of a plastic endometrial suction device (such as a pipelle) as the procedure is easy to perform, requires no cervical dilation, and is frequently well tolerated and equipment is routinely available even in low-resource settings. An office-based endometrial biopsy has been shown to offer tissue yield that is near comparable to dilation and curettage (D&C) and has an 83% sensitivity for detecting endometrial cancer. Insertion should first be attempted without the use of a tenaculum. In many patients, this is feasible and avoids the sensation of the tenaculum grasping the cervix. Once the suction is applied, the endometrial cavity should be thoroughly curetted in all directions, just as one would with a sharp curette during a D&C. Although most patients report no problems with cramps or pain, the application of suction in some patients stimulates cramping that usually passes within 5–10 minutes. Because cramping can occur, an inhibitor of prostaglandin synthesis given at least 20 minutes before the procedure has been shown to minimize procedure-related discomfort. Less than 10% of postmenopausal women cannot be adequately evaluated by office biopsy. Most commonly, the reason is the inability to negotiate the cervical canal and gain entry into the uterine cavity. In such instances, it is very reasonable to proceed with procedure under anesthesia when a D&C can be performed in the operating room; however, pretreatment with misoprostol or cervical laminaria may allow completion of office endometrial biopsy and thus avoid the need for anesthesia and D&C. We recommend consideration for office hysteroscopy or a SHG prior to proceeding with office endometrial biopsy and undertaking concomitant hysteroscopy at the time of D&C being undertaken for evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding,140 provided access to the equipment is available and the surgeon has the requisite expertise. Following a negative hysteroscopy result, the chance of endometrial cancer diagnosis is 0.4–0.5%.140 If the vulva, vagina, and cervix appear normal on inspection, menopausal bleeding can be assumed to be intrauterine in origin. Confirmation requires the absence of abnormal cytology on the Pap smear. The principal symptom of endometrial cancer is abnormal vaginal bleeding, but carcinoma will be encountered in patients with bleeding in less than 3% of postmenopausal endometrial biopsies.173–175 Normal endometrium is found over half the time, polyps in approximately 3%, endometrial hyperplasia about 15% of the time, and atrophic endometrium in the rest of patients with postmenopausal bleeding. Postmenopausal bleeding should always be taken seriously. Approximately 10% of patients who have benign findings at the initial evaluation subsequently develop significant pathology within 2 years.174 The persistence of abnormal bleeding demands repeated evaluation.

Additional procedures to consider include the following:

• Colposcopy and cervical biopsy for abnormal cytology or obvious lesions

• Endocervical assessment by curettage for abnormal cytology (the endocervix must always be kept in mind as a source for abnormal cytology)

Keep in mind that the pathologic reading, “tissue insufficient for diagnosis,” when a patient is on estrogen-progestin treatment, often represents atrophic, decidualized endometrium that yields little to the exploring curette. If the clinician is confident in his or her technique, knowing that a full investigation of the intrauterine cavity has been accomplished, then as long as the patient does not persist in bleeding, this reading can be interpreted as comforting and benign, the absence of pathology. Specifically, as long as the clinician is certain that the true uterine cavity was sampled (i.e., no false passage or stenotic os encountered), then no further testing is indicated unless abnormal bleeding persists and risk factors for neoplasia are present. In the event of continued bleeding or concerning risk factors (i.e., long-standing history of unopposed estrogen, obesity, hypertension, diabetes, nulliparous), consideration for referral to a gynecologic oncologist would be a prudent approach.

In the absence of organic disease, appropriate management of uterine bleeding is dependent on the age of the woman and endometrial tissue findings. In the menopausal woman with abnormal uterine bleeding associated with evidence of simple endometrial hyperplasia (uncomplicated by atypia or dysplastic constituents), periodic oral progestin therapy is mandatory (such as 10 mg medroxyprogesterone acetate or 5–10 mg norethindrone acetate for 14 days each month). Intrauterine placement of a levonorgestrel intrauterine device (LNG-IUD) is increasingly being utilized as an effective man-agement approach with high regression rates. Higher-dose oral progestins (such as 10–20 mg medroxyprogesterone ace-tate or 10–15 mg norethindrone acetate) are always an option and should be considered in the setting of obesity.176,177 Repeat endometrial sampling should be performed at 3 and 6 months of therapy. Most cases of simple hyperplasia will regress at 6 months; however, if there is no regression at 3–6 months, then consideration of increasing progestin dose or switching regi-men (such as to megestrol acetate in daily doses of 40–80 mg or LNG-IUD) should be entertained. Persistence or progression of abnormal endometrium was observed in 28.4% of women with complex hyperplasia and in 26.9% of women with atypical hyperplasia despite treatment with a progestational agent.178 At least two consecutive repeat negative biopsies should be conducted prior to stopping surveillance.176 In the absence of any regression after 1 year of progestin therapy, or if there is evidence of progression from simple or com-plex without atypia to atypical hyperplasia despite progestin therapy, then hysterectomy is indicated and referral to a gyne-cologic oncologist is strongly advised.176 Because hyperplasia with atypia carries with it a risk of concomitant cancer (even invasive), hysterectomy is the treatment of choice. However, progestational response was better with higher-dosage and longer-duration treatment. If histologic regression is not observed on office biopsy, a D&C should be considered before proceeding with hysterectomy.

Clinicians have often utilized a traditional postmeno-pausal hormone regimen to treat a woman with the kind of irregular cycles usually experienced in the perimenopausal years. This addition of exogenous estrogen without a contra-ceptive dose of progestin when a woman is not amenorrheic or experiencing menopausal symptoms is inappropriate and even risky (exposing the endometrium to excessively high levels of estrogen). And most importantly, a postmeno-pausal hormonal regimen does not inhibit ovulation and provide contraception.179 The appropriate response is to regulate anovulatory cycles with monthly progestational treatment along with an appropriate contraceptive method or to utilize low-dose estrogen-progestin contraception. An oral contraceptive that contains 20 μg estrogen provides effective contraception, improves menstrual cycle regularity, diminishes bleeding, and relieves menopausal symptoms.180 Treatment with the transdermal or vaginal method of estro-gen-progestin contraception would also be appropriate.

A common clinical dilemma is when to change from estrogen-progestin contraception to postmenopausal hor-mone therapy. It is important to change because even with the lowest estrogen dose contraceptive available, the estro-gen dose is fourfold greater than the standard postmeno-pausal dose, and with increasing age, the dose-related risks with estrogen become significant. One approach to establish the onset of the postmenopausal years is to mea-sure the FSH level, beginning at age 50, on an annual basis, being careful to obtain the blood sample on day 6 or 7 of the estrogen-progestin–free week in a standard 3-week regi-men (when steroid levels have declined sufficiently to allow FSH to rise). Friday afternoon works well for patients who start new estrogen-progestin treatment on Sunday. When FSH is greater than 20 IU/L, it is time to change to a post-menopausal hormone program. Because of the variability in FSH levels experienced by women around the menopause, this method is not always accurate.181,182 Indeed, in some women, FSH will not rise until 2 weeks after the last steroid contraception exposure. A 2-week wait is not very practical and places the patient at risk for an unwanted pregnancy. The treatment-free week method is practical and works for most women. Women who are dependent on contraceptives to prevent pregnancy can be allowed to enter their mid-50s on low-dose estrogen-progestin contraception and then empirically switched to a postmenopausal hormone regi-men. The empirical approach is necessary with patients using the newer extended-day or continuous dosing regi-mens of estrogen-progestin contraception.

Because of the favorable impact of locally released progestin on the endometrium, the LNG-IUD is very effective for the treat-ment of menorrhagia, as effective as the administration of oral progestins (with less side effects), and compares favorably with endometrial resection or ablation.183–187 In addition, this IUD can be used to treat endometrial hyperplasia.188–193 Comparison studies of endometrial hyperplasia indicate that the levonorg-estrel IUD is more effective than standard treatment with an oral progestin.189,194–196 The levonorgestrel IUD may be associ-ated with a slight increase in the formation of ovarian cysts, but they are asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously.197

In postmenopausal women, one must view any adnexal mass as cancer until proven otherwise. Surgical inter-vention is usually necessary, and appropriate consultation must be obtained not only for the surgical procedure but also for suitable preoperative evaluation and preparation. Nonpalpable, asymptomatic ovarian cysts are commonly detected by ultrasonography. Cysts that are less than 10 cm in diameter and without septations or solid components (unilocular) have a very low potential for malignant disease and can be managed with serial ultrasound surveillance (at 3 months, 6 months, 12 months, and then annually), especially if the serum CA 125 is normal.198,199 Surgery is recommended for symptomatic cases, if growth occurs, if internal echoes are obtained, if fluid develops in the pelvis, or if there is a family history of breast or ovarian cancer.

Vasomotor Symptoms

The vasomotor flush is viewed as the hallmark of the female climacteric, experienced to some degree by most postmenopausal women. The term “hot flush” or “hot flash” is descriptive of a sudden onset of reddening of the skin over the head, neck, and chest, accompanied by an increase in heart rate and a feeling of intense body heat. The flush is sometimes concluded by profuse perspiration. The dura-tion varies from a few seconds to several minutes and, rarely, for an hour. The frequency may be rare to recurrent every few minutes. Flushes are more frequent and severe at night (when a woman is often awakened from sleep) or during times of stress. In a cool environment, hot flushes are fewer, less intense, and shorter in duration compared with a warm environment.200 Most importantly, hot flushing can affect a woman’s quality of life and interfere with work or recre-ational activities.

In the longitudinal follow-up of a large number of women, fully 10% of the women experienced hot flushes before menopause, while in other studies, as many as 15–25% of premenopausal women reported hot flushes.8,79,201,202 The fre-quency has been reported to be even higher in premenopausal women diagnosed with PMS.203 In the Massachusetts Women’s Health Study, the incidence of hot flushes increased from 10% during the premenopausal period to about 50% just after ces-sation of menses.79 By approximately 4 years after menopause, the rate of hot flushes declined to 20%. In a community-based Australian survey, 6% of premenopausal women, 26% of peri-menopausal women, and 59% of postmenopausal women complained of hot flushing.204 A large American cross-sec-tional survey reported that 57% of perimenopausal women and 49% of early postmenopausal women experienced sig-nificant hot flushing.163 Another national survey in the United States reported hot flushing in 79% of perimenopausal women and 65% of postmenopausal women.205

In cross-sectional surveys, up to 40% of premenopausal women and 85% of menopausal women report some vasomotor complaints.202 A longitudinal study in Gothenburg, Sweden, recorded a maximal prevalence of 60% at age 52–54, with a decline to 30% at age 60 and 9% at age 72.206 In the SWAN study, 57% of perimenopausal women experienced hot flushing and about 50% after menopause up to age 55.207 There is no difference in the prevalence of vasomotor complaints in U.S. surveys of black and white women.208,209 Overweight women report more hot flushing, perhaps reflecting the effect of body fat causing a higher core body temperature.163,165,210 Exact estimates on prevalence are hampered by inconsistencies and differences in methodologies, cultures, and definitions.211 The prevalence in different societies is influenced by personal and social attitudes, individual psychological and physical health, familiarity with the portrayal of menopausal issues in the literature and media, ethnic variation, different diets, and dissimilar living conditions; however, accounting for cultural differences, the overall prevalence and experience are similar throughout the world.212,213

Although the flush can occur in the premenopause, it is a major feature of the menopause transition and post-menopause, peaking in the first year after the last men-ses, lasting in 50% of women for 4–5 years, but in some (as many as 25%) for longer than 5 years, and even up to 15 years in 10% (Table 17.5).214 In an excellent Australian longitudinal cohort study, the average duration of vaso-motor symptoms was 5.2 years (with a range of 2–10 years) in nonusers of hormone therapy and slightly lon-ger, 5.5 years, in hormone users.215 In the SWAN cohort, the median total duration of vasomotor symptoms was 7.4 years. Women who were premenopausal or early peri-menopausal at first reporting of frequent symptoms expe-rienced the longest duration (median, >11.8 years) and post-FMP persistence (median, 9.4 years), whereas women who first experienced vasomotor symptoms after onset of menopause had the shortest total duration of symptom (median, 3.4 years).216

The physiology of the hot flush is still not understood. Studies suggest that women with hot flushes have a more narrow zone of temperature regulation, and therefore, smaller changes in core body temperature produce compensatory responses, such as shivering or flushing.217 MRI scanning of the brain during hot flushing indicates widely distributed cor-tical activation rather than a precise location.218 Hot flushes are definitely brought about by a decline in estrogen; how-ever, not all hot flushes are due to estrogen deficiency. Flushes and sweating can be secondary to diseases, including pheo-chromocytoma, carcinoid, leukemias, pancreatic tumors, and thyroid abnormalities.219 When the clinical situation is not clear and obvious, estrogen deficiency as the cause of hot flushes should be documented by elevated levels of FSH.

The correlation between the onset of flushes and estro-gen reduction is clinically supported by the effectiveness of estrogen therapy and the absence of flushes in hypoestrogen states, such as gonadal dysgenesis. Only after estrogen is administered and withdrawn do hypogonadal women expe-rience the hot flush. Although the clinical impression that premenopausal surgical castrates suffer more severe vasomo-tor reactions is widely held, this was not borne out in the only objective study ever performed.220

Although the hot flush is the most common problem of the postmenopause, it presents no inherent health hazard. The flush is accompanied by a discrete and reliable pattern of physiologic changes.217,221 The flush coincides with a surge of LH (not FSH) and is preceded by a subjective prodromal awareness that a flush is beginning. This aura is followed by measurable increased heat over the entire body surface. A flush is triggered by a small elevation in core body tem-perature. The body surface experiences an increase in tem-perature, accompanied by changes in skin conductance, and then the flush is followed by a fall in core temperature—all of which can be objectively measured. In short, the flush is not a release of accumulated body heat but is a sudden inappro-priate excitation of heat release mechanisms. Its relationship to the LH surge and temperature change within the brain is not understood. The observation that flushes occur after hypophysectomy indicates that the mechanism is not depen-dent on or due directly to LH release. In other words, the same brain event that causes flushes also stimulates GnRH secretion and elevates LH. This is probably secondary to hypothalamic changes in neurotransmitters that increase neuronal and autonomic activity.222

Premenopausal women experiencing hot flushes should be screened for thyroid disease and other illnesses. A comprehensive review of all possible causes is available.223 Clinicians should be sensitive to the possibility of an under-lying emotional problem. Looking beyond the presenting symptoms into the patient’s life is an important service to the patient and her family that eventually will be appreciated. This is far more difficult than simply prescribing estrogen, but confronting problems is the only way of reaching some resolution.

A striking and consistent finding in most studies deal-ing with menopause and hormonal therapy is a marked placebo response (at least 51% in the first weeks of treat-ment)224 in a variety of symptoms, including flushing. In an English randomized, placebo-controlled study of women being treated with estrogen implants and requesting repeat implants, there was no difference in outcome in terms of psychological and physical symptoms comparing the women who received an active implant to those receiving a placebo.225 A significant clinical problem encountered in our referral practice is the following scenario: a woman will occasion-ally undergo an apparently beneficial response to estrogen, only to have the response wear off in several months despite ongoing use of prescribed hormonal regimen. Rather than continuously increasing the estrogen dose, it is important to consider altering the mode of delivery (i.e., switching from oral to transdermal) or timing of medication (i.e., if admin-istering orally, consider twice-daily dosing if giving estradiol as opposed to CEE). Importantly, uncommon differential diagnoses, such as pheochromocytoma or carcinoid, must be entertained when encountering recalcitrant vasomotor symptoms that remain unresponsive to increasing doses of estrogen therapy. Additionally, a careful inquiry must be undertaken to search for underlying psychosocial problems. To help persuade a patient that her symptoms are not due to low levels of estrogen, we find it very helpful and convincing to measure the patient’s blood level of estradiol and share the result with her.

Atrophic Changes:The Genitourinary Syndrome of Menopause

With extremely low estrogen production in the late postmeno-pausal age, or many years after castration, atrophy of vagi-nal mucosal surfaces takes place, accompanied by vaginitis, pruritus, dyspareunia, and stenosis. Genitourinary atrophy leads to a variety of symptoms that affect the ease and quality of living. Urethritis with dysuria, urgency incontinence, and urinary frequency are further results of mucosal thinning, in this instance, of the urethra and bladder. Recurrent urinary tract infections are effectively prevented by postmenopausal intravaginal estrogen treatment.226 Vaginal relaxation with cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse, and vulvar dystro-phies are not a consequence of estrogen deprivation.

Deprived of estrogen, the vagina loses collagen, adipose tis-sue, and the ability to retain water. As the vaginal walls shrink, the rugae flatten and disappear. The surface epithelium loses its outer fibrous layer and thins to a few layers of cells, mark-edly reducing the ratio of superficial to basal cells. As a result, the vaginal surface is left friable, prone to bleeding with mini-mal trauma. While these changes are occurring, the blood vessels in the vaginal walls narrow, and secretions from seba-ceous glands diminish. Over time, the vagina itself contracts and loses flexibility, while the labia minora become paler and smaller. In addition, pH becomes more alkaline, making the vaginal environment less hospitable to lactobacilli and more susceptible to infection by urogenital and fecal pathogens. Infecting organisms can ascend into the urinary system to cause urethritis, urinary tract infections, and cystitis.

Dyspareunia, sometimes with postcoital bleeding, is the inevitable consequence of a severely atrophied vagina and scanty lubrication. Even for women who are not sexu-ally active, atrophic vaginitis can cause itching, irritation, and burning. These symptoms often go unmentioned, and it is important to inspect for signs of vaginal atrophy even in the absence of complaints. Measuring pH is a simple way to determine estrogen’s influence or absence. A pH greater than 4.5 is almost always observed with estrogen deficiency.227,228

Dyspareunia seldom brings older women to our offices. A basic reluctance to discuss sexual behavior still perme-ates our society, especially among older patients and physi-cians. Gentle questioning may lead to estrogen treatment of atrophy and enhancement of sexual enjoyment. Objective measurements have demonstrated that vaginal factors that influence the enjoyment of sexual intercourse can be main-tained by appropriate doses of estrogen.229 Both patient and clinician should be aware that a significant response can be expected by 1 month, but it takes a long time to fully restore the genitourinary tract (6–12 months), and clinicians and patients should not be discouraged by an apparent lack of immediate response. Raloxifene and tamoxifen have little impact on the vaginal epithelium, and vaginal dryness is worse with aromatase inhibitors. Sexual activity by itself supports the circulatory response of the vaginal tissues and enhances the therapeutic effects of estrogen. Therefore, sexu-ally active older women have less atrophy of the vagina even without estrogen.

Although it is argued that genuine stress incontinence is not affected by treatment with estrogen, others contend that estrogen treatment improves or cures stress incontinence in over 50% of patients due to a direct effect on the urethral mucosa.230–232 A meta-analysis concluded that improvement was reported only in nonrandomized studies.233 Two ran-domized trials dedicated to this clinical problem failed to demonstrate a beneficial effect of estrogen treatment.234,235 Most cases of urinary incontinence in elderly women are a mixed problem with a significant component of urge incon-tinence that is believed to be improved by estrogen therapy. However, the Heart and Estrogen-Progestin Replacement Study (HERS) randomized trial indicated a worsening of incontinence with hormone therapy for both urge and stress incontinence, and the Nurses’ Health Study reported a small increase of incontinence in hormone users.236,237 In the SWAN study, only 15% of incontinent women reported a worsening of urinary incontinence during the menopausal transition, largely because of weight gain.238 The majority of incontinent women experienced either no change or an improvement. The SWAN study results imply that urinary incontinence is not a major symptom of menopause and the perimenopausal transition.238,239 In contrast, a Cochrane review from 2012 found that compared to placebo, women who received local estrogen-based therapy for incontinence noted improvement in symptoms.240 Interestingly, in trials using oral estrogen, women reported worsening of urinary symptoms.241 New-onset incontinence at midlife is not a consequence of hormonal changes.

A decline in skin collagen content, elasticity, and skin thickness that occurs with aging can be considerably avoided by postmenopausal estrogen therapy.242–246 The effect of estrogen on collagen is evident in both bone and skin; bone mass and collagen decline in parallel after menopause, and estrogen treatment reduces collagen turnover and improves collagen quality.247,248 One study demonstrated not only an increase in facial skin thickness, but an improvement in wrinkles with topical estrogen.249 A randomized trial demon-strated improvements in skin elasticity, skin hydration, and skin thickness comparing hormone treatment with placebo.250 More impressively, data from the U.S. First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) indicated that estrogen use was associated with a lower prevalence of skin wrinkling and dry skin.251 Smoking is a major risk factor for facial skin wrinkling, and hormone therapy cannot diminish this impact of smoking.252 In a 1-year clinical trial, hormone therapy did not improve skin wrinkling already present.253

One of the features of aging in men and women is a steady reduction in muscular strength. Many factors affect this decline, including height, weight, and level of physical activ-ity. Women currently using estrogen have been reported to demonstrate a lesser decline in muscular strength, although at least one study could detect no impact of estrogen.254–259 This is an important issue because of the potential protective consequences against fractures, as well as a benefit due to the ability to maintain vigorous physical exercise.
