Mental Health

The view that menopause has a deleterious effect on men-tal health is not supported in the psychiatric literature or in surveys of the general population.201,202,260,261 The concept of a specific menopause-induced psychiatric disorder (invo-lutional melancholia) has been abandoned. Indeed, depres-sion is less common, not more common, among middle-aged women, and the menopause cannot be linked to psychologi-cal distress.2–8,262 The longitudinal study of premenopausal women indicates that hysterectomy with or without oopho-rectomy is not associated with a negative psychological impact among middle-aged women.263 Longitudinal data from the Massachusetts Women’s Health Study document that menopause is not associated with an increased risk of depression.264 Although women are more likely to experience depression than men, this sex difference begins in early ado-lescence, not at menopause.265

The U.S. National Health Examination Follow-up Study includes both longitudinal and cross-sectional assessments of a nationally representative sample of women. This study has found no evidence linking either natural or surgical meno-pause to psychological distress.266 Indeed, the only longitudi-nal change was a slight decline in the prevalence of depression as women aged through the menopausal transition. Results in this study were the same in estrogen users and nonusers.

A negative view of mental health at the time of the menopause is not justified; many of the problems reported at the menopause are due to life events.10,11,267,268 Thus, there are problems encountered in the perimenopausal transition and the early postmenopause that are seen frequently, but their causal relation with estrogen is unlikely. These problems include fatigue, nervousness, headaches, insomnia, depres-sion, irritability, and palpitations. Indeed, at this stage of life, both men and women express a multitude of complaints that do not reveal a gender difference that could be explained by a hormonal cause.269,270 Nevertheless, midlife women report complaints more often than men,270 perhaps reflecting the generally negative perceptions and connotations our cultures and societies have attributed to the menopause.

Sleep disturbances are a common complaint during the menopausal transition and in early postmenopausal years.271 Difficulties with falling to sleep and with staying asleep, sleep interruptions, and early awakenings are all more often encountered during menopause transition and postmeno-pause compared to during the reproductive stage of aging. Disordered sleep itself can negatively affect health outcomes, including risk of depression.271 While hormonal changes can affect sleep, it has been difficult to establish the extent to which hormonal changes contribute to poor sleep. Several epide-miologic studies have demonstrated that men and women, upon entering midlife, experience poor sleep quality.272 Increased nighttime awakening and overall loss of total sleep time are common in women in the menopausal transition and postmenopausal.272 Perhaps not surprisingly, nocturnal vasomotor symptoms (hot flushes and night sweats) likely contribute to sleep disturbances.272 The underlying body temperature dysregulation and stress activation during epi-sodes of vasomotor phenomenon are detrimental to sleep.272 Studies assessing correlation between vasomotor symptoms and sleep patterns on polysomnography, however, are con-flicting suggesting existence of unidentified confounders.272

The high prevalence of sleep issues during menopause transition and postmenopause has been suggested to con-tribute to depressive symptoms and to an overall decline in quality of life.273–275 Two longitudinal cohort studies assessed the new onset of depressive symptoms and disorders dur-ing the menopausal transition. The Penn Ovarian Aging Study followed over 8 years 436 women with no history of depression and correlated hormonal changes with the onset of depressed mood.276 Fifty percent of the women developed an increase in measures of depression and 26% met the cri-teria for a clinical diagnosis of depressive disorder. Using the women as their own controls, the depression group was 2.5 times more likely to develop clinical depression comparing status during the perimenopausal transition to the premeno-pausal state. These symptoms during the perimenopausal transition were associated with greater variability (but no average differences) in estradiol levels, suggesting that fluc-tuations of estradiol can be an important destabilizing factor. The Harvard Study of Moods and Cycles is a prospective cohort of women with and without histories of depression.277 In the women who entered the menopausal transition, the risk of new depression was almost doubled compared with premenopausal women, from 9.5% to 16.6%, and this risk was linked to the presence of vasomotor symptoms. Importantly, a statistically significant increase in risk of new depressive symptoms was present only in women with a history of adverse life events (the events are not defined or specified in the report). Also of note, 83% of the women experienced no mood changes.

The SWAN study reported similar results. A first episode of depression in perimenopausal women was linked to poor physical health, anxiety disorders, stressful life events, and hot flushing.278

Additional studies have shed further light on the role of VMS, sleep disturbances, and depressive symptoms. In a pooled analysis of eight studies from the InterLACE consortium, it was found that sleep difficulties related to VMS explained to a large extent the relationship between VMS and depressed mood.274 Interestingly, the OR of depressed mood associated with often/severe vasomotor symptoms was not significant when adjusted for sleep dis-turbances at baseline.274 However, having an often/severe depressed mood remained associated with subsequent risk of VMS.274 Alternatively, using the SWAN cohort, a study by Kravitz et al. noted that while sleep disturbances increase across the menopausal transition, they did not necessarily worsen over time.279 It is important to note, however, that vasomotor symptoms were significantly associated with the number of sleep disturbances experienced throughout the menopausal transition.279

This area of concern has been very difficult to study. Inconsistent results can reflect variations in study designs, selection of subjects, methods used to measure mood, and the definition of menopausal status. However, the best reports provide reliable evidence of a vulnerable popula-tion of women. Depressive mood changes are influenced by other factors, including body weight, smoking, PMS (dis-cussed in Chapter 14), employment, and marital status. PMS during reproductive years is a strong predictor of depres-sive symptoms arising in the menopausal transition.

The most important questions are whether truly normal women experience an increase in depression during the menopausal transition and are there subtle or even clinically apparent psychological problems that identify a susceptible subgroup. In a cross-sectional analysis of the SWAN cohort, it was found that only 5% of women were affected with the “triad” of depressed mood, disturbed sleep, and sexual problems, suggesting that perhaps there is in fact a susceptible group of women predisposed to psychological consequences in the menopause.280 Cohort studies support the argument that there is a vulnerable group of women who are at risk for experiencing new-onset depressive symptoms during the menopausal transition. Existing data are consistent with the idea that fluctuations in reproductive hormone levels, as is particularly prevalent during the menopause transition, are related to mood symptoms; however, it is impossible to know if this is a true cause-and-effect relationship. Until such a cause-and-effect relationship is elucidated, current efforts should focus on identifying and treating menopausal women suffering from sleep disturbances related to vasomotor symptoms. In a pooled analysis of individual participant data from four RCTs assessing the effect of various interventions for insomnia related to vasomotor symptoms, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) was most successful in reducing insomnia symptoms.275 Exercise, venlafaxine, escitalopram, yoga, and estradiol were also effective, but less so when compared to CBT.275

In summary, most women (over 85%) experience the menopausal transition without mood difficulties. Some however are at greater risk of new-onset depressive symp-toms,and this is probably enhanced by hormonal variations and vasomotor symptoms. This “vulnerable” population is likely derived from a group of premenopausal women with underlying psychological underpinnings. Although it can be hypothesized that the perimenopausal hormone milieu makes an individual less able to deal with adverse events in life, concrete data to support this concept are lacking.

Attempts to study the effects of estrogen on these prob-lems have been hampered by the subjectivity of the com-plaints (high placebo responses) and the “domino effect” of what a reduction of hot flushes does to the frequency of the symptoms. Using a double-blind crossover prospective study format, Campbell and Whitehead concluded many years ago that many symptomatic “improvements” ascribed to estrogen therapy result from relief of hot flushes—a “domino” effect.281 Studies that have controlled for menopausal symptoms con-clude that mood is very affected by vasomotor symptoms and sleep disturbances, besides reflecting life problems.135,282 A study of 2,001 Australian women aged 45–55 focused on the utilization of the health care system by women in the perimenopausal period of life.13 Users of the health care system in this age group were frequent previous users of health care, were less healthy, and had more psychosomatic symptoms and vasomotor reactions. These women were more likely to have had a significant previous adverse health history, including a past history of premenstrual complaints. This study emphasized that perimenopausal women who seek health care help are different from those who do not seek help, and they often embrace hormone therapy in the hope it will solve their problems. Similar findings have been reported in a cohort of British women.283 It is this population that is seen most often, producing biased opinions among clinicians regarding the menopause. We must be careful not to generalize to the entire female population the behavior experienced by a few. Most importantly, menopausal women who present to clinicians often end up being treated with estrogen inappropriately and unnecessarily. Nevertheless, it is well established that a woman’s quality of life is disrupted by vasomotor symptoms, and estrogen therapy provides impressive improvement.284–286 Patients are grateful to be the recipients of this “domino” effect.

The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI, discussed later under Menopausal Hormone Therapy) concluded that estrogen-progestin therapy had no beneficial impact on health-related quality of life.287 However, only 12.7% of the participants had moderate to severe vasomotor symptoms at entry to the study, and the symptom burden in this popula-tion can be questioned because the participants were willing to take placebo medication. The overall baseline quality of life in this study was relatively high, and the study partici-pants were older (the average number of years distant from menopause was 12+). This randomized, clinical trial did not study the appropriate population of women in order to assess the effect of hormone therapy on measures of quality of life. The Women’s International Study of Long Duration Oestrogen after the Menopause (WISDOM) trial was a ran-domized, controlled trial in the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand of 3,721 women aged 50–69 treated with either combined 0.625 mg conjugated estrogens to 2.5/5.0 mg medroxyprogesterone or placebo.288 The original plan was to randomize 22,300 women to the study that would last 10 years. The study was canceled in October 2002 in reac-tion to the initial reports from the WHI. Unfortunately, the premature cancellation precludes the possibility of any long-term data from WISDOM. In 2,130 women who completed 1 year, there were statistically significant improvements in the treated women in the categories of vasomotor, sexual, and sleep symptoms. Treated women reported a reduction in aching joints and muscles, night sweats, insomnia, and vaginal dryness. The treated group reported more breast ten-derness, but the percentages were notably low (16% in the treated group and 7% in the placebo group).

The WISDOM trial investigators argued that the small effects on quality of life reported by the WHI and HERS can be attributed to the insensitive measurement tools used in those clinical trials. The WISDOM trial used a survey tool specifically designed to assess postmenopausal physical and emotional well-being, plus a validated, generic ques-tionnaire, the European quality of life instrument. Only the specific questionnaire detected significant changes; the European generic tool did not. This emphasizes the impor-tance of using the appropriate study tool to investigate this area of postmenopausal health. Similar results with vaso-motor symptoms, sleep, and joint complaints were actually reported by the WHI, but with a smaller difference between treated and placebo groups. The WHI survey had only one question devoted to sexuality.

The results of the WISDOM trial are not surprising; they reflect what all clinicians have observed in their own practices. The most important point to be made is this: the WISDOM, WHI, and HERS trials were all similar in that they enrolled postmenopausal women heavily tilted toward the oldest age group without symptoms. It is a simple and logical conclusion that hormone therapy in a younger, symp-tomatic group of postmenopausal women would produce greater quality of life benefits than that quantified in the clinical trials. All three clinical trials, therefore, underesti-mated the beneficial impact because of age and symptom status of their participants. However, in the WISDOM trial, even older postmenopausal women who were symptomatic benefited from hormone therapy. Age should not be the sole guiding factor in decision-making.

Emotional stability during the perimenopausal period can be disrupted by poor sleep patterns. Hot flushing does have an adverse impact on the quality of sleep.289–291 Estrogen therapy improves the quality of sleep, decreasing the time to onset of sleep and increasing the rapid eye movement (REM) sleep time.284,292,293 In the SWAN study, one-third of the women reported sleep problems, even without hot flushes or night sweats, and the prevalence of vasomotor symptoms was associated with an increased risk of sleep disturbances; hormone therapy improved sleep quality.294,295 Perhaps, flushing may be insufficient to awaken a woman but sufficient to affect the quality of sleep, thereby diminishing the ability to handle the next day’s problems and stresses. An improvement in sleeping with estrogen treatment can even be documented in postmenopausal women who are report-edly asymptomatic.293

Thus, the overall “quality of life” reported by women can be improved by better sleep and alleviation of hot flushing. However, it is still uncertain whether estrogen treatment has an additional direct pharmacologic antidepressant effect or whether the mood response is totally an indirect ben-efit of relief from physical symptoms and, consequently, improved sleep. Utilizing various assessment tools for mea-suring depression, improvements with estrogen treatment were recorded in oophorectomized women.296,297 In the large prospective cohort study of the Rancho Bernardo retire-ment community, no benefit could be detected in measures of depression in current users of postmenopausal estrogen compared with untreated women.298 Indeed, treated women had higher depressive symptom scores, presumably reflect-ing treatment selection bias; symptomatic and depressed women seek hormone therapy. Others report that estrogen therapy has a more powerful impact on women’s well-being beyond the relief of symptoms such as hot flushes.284,299,300 In elderly depressed women, improvements in response to fluoxetine were enhanced by the addition of estrogen ther-apy.301 In a 12-week, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of 55 perimenopausal women with clinically significant major depression, estradiol treatment with the 100 mg transdermal method significantly improved mood.302 A similar American short-term study of 34 perimenopausal women with both major and minor depressions treated with 50 mg estradiol transdermally demonstrated improvements independently of an effect on vasomotor symptoms.303 These small clinical trials argue that estrogen treatment is beneficial for the treat-ment of clinical depression. This conclusion is supported by the successful treatment of postpartum depression with estradiol treatment.304,305

The most common cause of mood problems is already-existing depression,9,306 but there does exist a small popu-lation of women whose moods are sensitive to hormonal changes. In the American SWAN study, the prevalence of mood changes increased from the premenopause to the early menopause, from about 10% to about 16.5%.306 There are three possible explanations: (1) the decline in estrogen at menopause affects neurotransmitters that regulate mood; (2) mood is adversely affected by vasomotor symptoms (the domino theory); and (3) mood is affected by the vicissitudes of life that are commonly prevalent around menopause. Some would argue that these mood swings are in response to the hormonal fluctuations that occur during the peri-menopausal years. These fluctuations do indeed occur,53 but whether they cause any symptoms remains to be determined. It seems logical that individuals with mood problems can reflect all of these mechanisms.

Cognition and Dementia

Depending on the method of assessment, evidence for beneficial effects of estrogen on cognition can be found in the literature, especially in verbal memory.307 However, the effects in healthy women are not impressive and perhaps of little clinical value.

Another possibility for the variable effects of estrogen treatment on cognition is the variability among women in endogenous estrogen levels. Using sensitive assays for free, non–protein-bound estradiol and bioavailable (loosely bound) estradiol, cognitive decline occurred at a greater rate in women with low estradiol levels.308 Studies of cognition may have to differentiate between low- and high-risk women according to endogenous, biologically active estradiol levels. Similarly, a beneficial effect on cognitive decline has been observed only in women negative for the gene associated with Alzheimer disease, APOE-ε4, which encodes the ε4 allele of the glycoprotein known as apolipoprotein E, which has, as one of its functions, the shuttling of lipids during neu-ronal repair.309

Up to 3 times as many women as men develop Alzheimer disease. Estrogen is capable of protecting central nervous sys-tem function by means of multiple mechanisms. For exam-ple, estrogen protects against neuronal cytotoxicity induced by oxidation; estrogen reduces the serum concentration of amyloid P component (the glycoprotein found in Alzheimer amyloid plaques); and estrogen increases synapses and neuronal growth, especially dendritic spine density.310–312 Estrogen protects against the cerebrovascular toxicity exerted by amyloid peptides and promotes synaptic forma-tion and neuronal growth and survival.313–315 Progestational agents do not exert similar actions.

Case-control and cohort findings indicated that Alzheimer disease and related dementia occurred less fre-quently (perhaps as much as 60% less) in estrogen users, and the effect was greater with increasing dose and duration of use.316–318 In the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (a prospective cohort), the risk of Alzheimer disease was 54% reduced; in a cohort in New York City, the risk was reduced 60%; and in the Italian Longitudinal Study of Aging, the risk was 72% reduced in estrogen users.319–321 The findings are not uniformly positive; a case-control study with accurate infor-mation on clinical diagnoses and estrogen use from the U.K. General Practice Research Database could detect no impact of estrogen treatment on the risk of developing Alzheimer disease, but the number of estrogen users was very small.322

The short-term administration of unopposed estrogen to patients with Alzheimer disease (secondary prevention) has been reported to improve cognitive performance, but mostly to have no effect.323–327 The administration of combinations of estrogen and progestin has also failed to demonstrate a benefi-cial impact in Alzheimer disease.328 The presence of estrogen therapy has been reported to enhance the beneficial response to tacrine in women with Alzheimer disease,329 but overall, the evi-dence is consistent with a failure of estrogen to influence already-existing Alzheimer disease or other forms of dementia.330

The data do support, however, a primary preven-tive effect. Most revealing is a prospective cohort study of women living in Cache County, Utah.331 Hormone therapy provided about a 41% reduced risk of developing Alzheimer with any use and an 83% reduction with 10 or more years of use. This cohort also demonstrated improved cognition in estrogen users.332 Most importantly, if women had initiated hormone therapy within a period of time that encompassed 10 years before the development of clinical symptoms, there was no effect. The Utah study strongly suggested that hor-mone therapy must be used for a significant duration of time very early in the postmenopausal period in order to have an impact on the risk of Alzheimer disease. As neurons become changed by the pathology of dementia, they lose their ability to respond favorably to estrogen.279

The importance of timing is supported by findings from the large WHI clinical trial. The oldest women in the WHI being treated with either estrogen alone or combined estrogen-progestin (treatment began at age 65 or older) had impaired cognition and an increased risk of dementia.333–335 In a subset of these women, MRI scans demonstrated greater brain atrophy in the women receiving hormone therapy.336 The mechanism for this adverse effect of hormonal therapy in old women may be a neurotoxic action because the WHI study with MRI scanning could not detect an increase in ischemic brain lesions.337 Smaller MRI studies of younger women treated with hormone therapy found beneficial trophic changes in brain morphology, associated with improved cognition.338–340 The KEEPS-Cognitive and Affective Study was an ancillary study to the KEEPS, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of menopausal hormone therapy (further discussed later in this chapter under the section on Menopausal Hormone Therapy). While the parent study examined the timing hypothesis from the perspective of cardiovascular disease, the ancillary study examined the timing hypothesis from the perspective of cognition and mood.341 In KEEPS, postmenopausal women within 3 years of the last menstrual period were randomized to oral versus transdermal estrogen versus placebo. Over a 4-year intervention period, 220 women received daily 0.45 mg oral conjugated equine estrogens (o-CEEs), 211 women received 50 μg/day transdermal estradiol (t-E2), and 262 women were assigned to placebo pills and patches. Women assigned to oral and transdermal estrogen additionally received micronized progesterone 200 mg/day for the first 12 days of each month. The primary outcomes for the Cognitive and Affective ancillary study included the Modified Mini-Mental State Examination, verbal learning/memory, auditory attention/working memory, visual attention/executive function, and speeded language/ mental flexibility, and a mood measure (Profile of Mood States).341 The KEEPS cognitive study failed to demonstrate any neuroprotective effects of menopausal hormone therapy on the studied cognitive outcomes. However, improvement in mood parameters (tension-anxiety, depression-dejection, anger-hostility, fatigue, vigor, and confusion-bewilderment) was observed in the subgroup of women assigned to o-CEE.341 In a subsample of KEEPS subjects, the effect of hormone therapy on beta-amyloid protein deposition was studied using positron emission tomography (PET) scan. Of the 112 KEEPS eligible participants, 61 women with a median age of 60 were included in the analysis. While there were no differences in baseline characteristics of the subjects, carriers of the apolipoprotein e4 allele (a known risk factor for developing Alzheimer disease) who were assigned to transdermal estradiol arm of the clinical trial had evidence of reduced beta-amyloid protein deposition on PET scan.342 While the sample size is small, KEEPS data suggest that effects of estrogen on the brain may differ by route and formulation of hormone regimen.342

The theme that emerges is that maintenance of health in target organs by estrogen requires normal tissue, a principle of timing that will also be discussed in regard to the heart later in this chapter under the section on Menopausal Hormone Therapy. Following the failure of secondary prevention trials to demonstrate a beneficial impact of hormone therapy on coronary disease in older women, it is increasingly argued that healthy cardiovascu-lar endothelium is needed to respond to estrogen; that by the time, the endothelium is involved with excessive ath-erosclerosis, it is too late for estrogen to exert a beneficial effect. A similar argument is made for brain tissue, focus-ing on biochemical and signaling pathways that are pro-gressively compromised with the neuronal involvement with disease.343 The requirement for normal tissue, at least in the heart and in the brain, would explain the beneficial effects in studies of primary prevention and the lack of effect in secondary prevention trials.
