CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE

Diseases of the heart are the leading cause of death for women in the United States, followed by cerebrovascular disease and malignant neoplasms. In 2016, one in four female deaths were from CHD compared with one in eight women who develop breast cancer.344 More female deaths in 2016 were caused by cardiovascular diseases than the combined total from cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, Alzheimer disease, accidents, and diabetes mellitus.

Most cardiovascular disease results from atherosclerosis in major vessels. The risk factors are the same for men and women: family history of cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes mellitus, an abnormal choles-terol/lipoprotein profile (Table 17.6), and obesity. However, when controlling for these risk factors, men prior to age 40 have a risk of developing CHD twice that of women. With increasing age, this advantage is gradually lost, and cardio-vascular disease becomes the leading cause of death for both older women and older men.

Cardiovascular disease, especially atherosclerosis, is a consequence of multiple metabolic changes that interact with each other:

• Adverse changes in the circulating lipid-lipoprotein profile.

• Oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), producing a modified LDL that is chemotactic for circulating mono-cytes and inhibits macrophage motility (thus trapping macrophages in the intima) and that causes cell injury and death in the endothelium.

• Endothelial injury and dysfunction affecting nitric oxide and prostacyclin production.

• Macrophage migration and functions, influenced by growth factors and cytokines.

• Proliferation and migration of smooth muscle cells, also influenced by growth factors and cytokines; these cells become the dominant cell type and the source of the con-nective tissue matrix in the atherosclerotic lesion, the fibrous plaque.

• Vasoconstriction and thrombogenic events.

• Remodeling of coronary arteries. An artery is able to respond to a developing atherosclerotic plaque by increas-ing its overall diameter in an attempt to maintain flow.345 The mechanism of this adaptive remodeling is not known, but the extent of this process must affect the risk of occlu-sion and infarction.

There is an established sequence of events leading to ath-erosclerosis (Figure 17.10). The process starts with endo-thelial dysfunction that leads to the fatty streak in arterial vessels, the precursor to clinically significant lesions. The fatty streak lesion, therefore, antedates the fibrous plaque, developing under the endothelial surface and dominated by fat-laden macrophages (the foam cells). The damaged endothelium expresses cytokines, adhesion molecules, and other inflammatory agents that are involved in the formation of atherosclerotic plaques. The formation of a plaque is initi-ated by the aggregation and adherence of circulating mono-cytes (macrophages) to a site on the arterial endothelium, stimulating an inflammatory response. When the monocytes penetrate through the endothelium and enter the intima, they become loaded with lipids and converted to foam cells. Modification of LDL, especially oxidation, is crucial in this conversion of monocytes to foam cells. The adherence of monocytes to endothelium can be induced by elevated cholesterol and LDL cholesterol in the circulation. Most of the cholesterol that accumulates in atherosclerotic plaques is derived from circulating LDL cholesterol. As plaques become significant in size, they are prone to instability, rupturing, and creating a prothrombotic state. Matrix metalloprotein-ase enzymes are secreted by inflammatory cells and smooth muscle cells. These enzymes digest the proteins in the fibrous cap of an atherosclerotic plaque, making the plaque unsta-ble and predisposed to rupture. Estrogen induces matrix metalloproteinase production or activity, which digests the fibrous cap of a plaque exposing the underlying throm-bogenic collagen, and this is believed to be the mechanism involved in the adverse thrombotic effects of estrogen in the presence of established atherosclerosis.346 In addition, 27-hydroxycholesterol, a cholesterol metabolite elevated in atherosclerotic lesions, competitively antagonizes estrogen receptor activity in cardiovascular epithelium.347 During the reproductive years, women are “protected” from CHD. For this reason, women lag behind men in the incidence of CHD by 10 years, and for myocardial infarc-tion and sudden death, women have a 20-year advantage. The reasons for this are complex, but a significant con-tribution to this protection can be assigned to the higher high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels in younger women, an effect of estrogen and lower levels of testosterone. Throughout adulthood, the blood HDL cholesterol level is about 10 mg/dL higher in women, and this difference con-tinues through the postmenopausal years. Total and LDL cholesterol levels are lower in premenopausal women than in men, although the levels gradually increase with aging and after menopause they rise rapidly.348–352 After meno-pause, the risk of CHD doubles for women as the athero-genic lipids at about age 60 reach levels greater than those in men. These changes can be favorably reduced by dietary modifications.353,354 Of course, these lipid changes at meno-pause (whether natural or surgical) can be reversed with estrogen treatment.355

Prospective studies have documented the strong associa-tion between total cholesterol and CHD in women, although CHD risk appears at higher total cholesterol levels for women than for men.356,357 Women with total cholesterol concentra-tions greater than 265 mg/dL have rates of CHD 3 times that of women with low levels. Even in elderly women, a high total cholesterol remains a significant predictor of heart disease, but the strength of the association between the cholesterol level and cardiovascular disease decreases with aging, and by age 80, the cost and benefits may not justify cholesterol inter-vention.358 This is the reason for ceasing lipoprotein screen-ing after age 75 in patients with normal lipids. However, this decision should be individualized, taking into account the vigor and health of the patient.

The strongest predictor of CHD in women is a low HDL cholesterol.356,357,359 The average HDL cholesterol in women is approximately 55–60 mg/dL. A decrease in HDL cholesterol of 10 mg/dL increases CHD risk by 40–50%. In women (and men) who had normal total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels, but low HDL cholesterol levels, treatment with lovastatin reduced the risk of an acute major coronary event by approximately 37%.360 High HDL cholesterol levels are uncommon in women with CHD, but even women with high levels do develop CHD.361 Because of the increased risk of CHD observed in individuals with low HDL, it is appropriate to be concerned when HDL cholesterol levels are less than 50 mg/dL. It should be emphasized that modest elevations in blood pressure markedly increase the overall cardiovascular risk associated with an elevated LDL cholesterol or a low HDL cholesterol.

Keep in mind that low HDL cholesterol levels are a com-ponent of the metabolic syndrome related to insulin resis-tance. The metabolic syndrome is partly a result of heredity but is also strongly influenced by obesity and physical inac-tivity. In the United States, the overall estimated prevalence of the metabolic syndrome is 24%, higher in women (40% by age 60) and increasing with age.362 The prevalence increases with increasing body weight, from about 5% in normal-weight individuals to 60% in obese men and women, and the prevalence is highest in Mexican Americans and lowest in Blacks.363

Metabolic Syndrome and Cardiovascular Disease

As defined by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and the American Heart Association, a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome requires the presence of any three of the following five clinical characteristics364:

1.	Increased waist circumference (population specific, >88 cm for women in the United States)

2.	Increased blood pressure (≥130 mm Hg systolic; ≥85 mm Hg diastolic) or receiving medication for hypertension

3.	Increased triglycerides (≥150 mg/dL) or receiving medication for hypertriglyceridemia

4.	Decreased HDL cholesterol (<50 mg/dL) or receiving medication for reduced HDL

5.	Increased fasting glucose (≥100 mg/dL) or receiving medication for hyperglycemia

An increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome dur-ing the menopausal transition is correlated with increasing androgen dominance, as estrogen secretion declines.365,366 Adiposity of the trunk is a risk factor for CHD in women and is associated with a relatively androgenic hormonal state, as well as hypertension, and disorders of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism.367 Central fat distribution in women is posi-tively correlated with increases in total cholesterol, triglyc-erides, and LDL cholesterol and negatively correlated with HDL cholesterol.368 The atherogenic lipid profile associated with abdominal adiposity is at least partly mediated through an interplay with insulin and estrogen.369 It is worth noting that there is a strong correlation between the magnitude of the worsening in cardiovascular risk factors (lipid and lipo-protein changes, blood pressure, and insulin levels) and the amount of weight gained during the menopausal transi-tion.370 Attention to weight gain during middle age is one of the most important components of good preventive health care. However, weight gain at menopause is not an effect of hormonal changes, but rather it reflects aging-related alterations in lifestyle such as changes in diet and exercise that accompany aging.370

Current recommendations regarding the optimal choles-terol/lipoprotein profile are more aggressive, urging more intensive treatment aimed at lowering LDL cholesterol levels; in the presence of CHD, the goal is to lower LDL cholesterol to less than 100 mg/dL.371 Cholesterol-lowering drugs, specifically the statin family, have been repeatedly demonstrated in clinical trials to have a marked reduction in the risk of clinical cardiovascular events in both men and women.372,373

Triglycerides are also an important risk factor for CHD in women, but are most commonly encountered in indi-viduals with the metabolic syndrome.371 If the triglyceride level is greater than 400 mg/dL and the HDL cholesterol is less than 50 mg/dL, the risk of heart disease is substantially increased. Patients with an elevated triglyceride level and a positive family history for heart disease most likely have an autosomal dominant disorder classified as familial combined hyperlipidemia. This disorder accounts for most myocardial infarctions in women less than 40 years old. Triglyceride levels of 150–200 mg/dL are considered borderline elevated. Triglyceride levels can be elevated because of obesity, smok-ing, and lack of exercise. Weight loss alone can return ele-vated triglyceride levels to normal.

Observational studies and clinical trials indicate that the major determinants of blood lipid levels are the same for both sexes. A diet high in saturated fatty acids and dietary cholesterol unfavorably increases blood lipids. Excess caloric intake and obesity decrease HDL cholesterol and increase total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, and triglycer-ides. Smoking decreases HDL cholesterol (and also produces lower estrogen levels and an earlier menopause). Genetic defects of receptor-mediated cholesterol uptake account for only a small percentage of hyperlipidemia in men and women. There is also evidence that men and women who had impaired fetal growth have increased levels of choles-terol and LDL cholesterol in middle age.374 The speculation is that impaired liver growth in utero produces a permanent adverse change in cholesterol and lipoprotein metabolism. Reduced fetal growth also leads in adulthood to insulin resis-tance and lower HDL cholesterol levels, most severe in those who become obese.375

C-Reactive Protein and Cardiovascular Disease

The immune system (monocytes, cytokines, and cell adhe-sion molecules) and inflammatory processes both play an active role in the process of atherosis.376 Studies indicate that C-reactive protein (CRP) is a marker of cardiovascular risk in both men and women.377–379 This risk is limited, how-ever, to arterial disease; CRP levels are not linked to venous thrombosis or pulmonary embolus.377 CRP predicts an increased risk of cardiovascular events even in individuals who have normal lipid levels, and, therefore, it is argued that both CRP and lipid profiles should be used for screen-ing purposes.379,380

CRP is a protein synthesized in the liver and atheroscle-rotic arteries and was given its name because it reacts with the C-polysaccharide of Streptococcus pneumoniae. Thus, the circulating level of CRP increases in response to vari-ous inflammatory stimuli, but specifically bacterial infec-tions and chronic inflammatory conditions such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Sensitive assays now detect small increases associated with low-grade inflammation in the vas-cular system.

Increased levels of CRP in patients with angina predict poor outcome, an increase in the relative risk of a coronary event. Prospective studies have documented an increased risk of cardiovascular events in patients without known car-diovascular disease who have high CRP levels, an associa-tion that is even greater in smokers.381 Higher mean levels are found in both men and women who subsequently have myocardial infarctions. Stroke and peripheral vascular dis-ease are also increased in men with higher CRP levels, and in women, CRP is also elevated in stroke.382 In a meta-analysis of 14 prospective studies, individuals with CRP levels in the top third compared with individuals in the bottom third had a twofold increase in relative risk for CHD.383 Thus, CRP levels have predictive value in both healthy individuals and individuals with cardiac disease. In addition, statin treat-ment lowers CRP levels,384 and evidence indicates that statins and aspirin achieve greater benefits in individuals with high CRP levels.377,385

In general, studies have indicated that oral estrogen treat-ment (with or without progestin) increases CRP levels and raloxifene does not. In a double-blind, randomized trial, menopausal hormone therapy and raloxifene equally low-ered homocysteine levels (a marker for vascular risk), but estrogen-progestin treatment increased CRP levels, whereas raloxifene had no effect.386 These results were duplicated in a Dutch randomized study.387 Tibolone (discussed later in this chapter under the section on Menopausal Hormone Therapy) increases CRP levels to the same degree as oral estrogen ther-apy.388 A cross-sectional study found higher levels of CRP in healthy postmenopausal women using hormone therapy.389 In the PEPI randomized trial, hormone therapy increased CRP levels, but the levels of E-selectin, another marker of inflammation, were reduced.390

An estrogen-induced increase in CRP levels may be due to the known stimulant effects of estrogen on hepatic synthesis of proteins, especially because of the first-pass phenomenon with oral administration. For this reason, transdermal estro-gen treatment does not change CRP levels.388,391,392 Studies on multiple inflammatory markers report that oral estrogen therapy increases only CRP, the only marker synthesized in the liver. In fact, oral hormone therapy while increasing CRP reduces the circulating levels of other inflammatory mark-ers (E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, monocyte chemoattractant pro-tein-1, and tumor necrosis factor-α) with inconsistent effects on interleukin-6 (IL-6).393,394 Most importantly, it is not certain that the decrease in CRP levels with statins and the increase with estrogen are actually instrumental in clinical outcomes or reflect other effects. Thus, raising or lowering CRP levels will not necessarily increase and decrease the risk of clinical disease. A study from the WHI confirmed the correlation between baseline levels of CRP and an ele-vated risk of CHD, but the increase in CRP induced by oral hormone therapy did not further increase this risk!395 The uncertainties and questions regarding the clinical relevance of CRP levels make it premature to conclude that changes in CRP levels with hormone therapy have any direct clinical consequence. This does not detract, however, from the utility of CRP levels in quantifying the overall risk of cardiovascular disease in an individual patient.

Homocysteine and Cardiovascular Disease

Hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with an increase in risk for CHD.379 Increasing folic acid intake and hormone therapy both reduce the circulating levels of homocysteine. In the WHI observation study, assessment of inflamma-tion and hemostasis biomarkers for predicting stroke was undertaken in postmenopausal women, and homocysteine was not found to be of any value as a predictive biomarker in this population.382 The value of homocysteine measure-ments in a screening program and the efficacy of therapy directed to lowering homocysteine levels remain to be determined.

Lipoprotein(a) and Cardiovascular Disease

Lp(a) is composed of two parts, a lipoprotein particle that is similar to LDL and a glycoprotein component that resembles a clotting protein. Lp(a) is an independent risk factor for CHD. Menopausal hormone therapy has been associated with reduction in circulating Lp(a) levels.396 Unlike other markers, the levels of Lp(a) are unaffected by lifestyle, and no clinical use has been established for Lp(a) measurements.

Sex Steroids and Cardiovascular Disease

By a large margin, the leading cause of death among women continues to be CHD. Coronary atherosclerosis is a lifelong process that varies in its slope of development according to the presence or absence of risk factors. The landmark Pathobiological Determinants of Atherosclerosis in Youth (PDAY) study documented the presence of fatty streaks in adolescents and an increasing prevalence with increasing age.397 The PDAY study further established that abnormal lipid profiles early in life are a major factor in determin-ing the extent and age of onset of atherosclerosis.398 It is important for clinicians caring for women to appreciate the importance of premenopausal atherosclerosis and to under-stand that appropriate medical interventions can reduce the risk of later clinical events. Because atherosclerosis begins early in life, it is logical to conclude that the postmenopausal risk of coronary clinical events is influenced by the degree of coronary artery atherosclerosis already present at the time of menopause.

Women with POI (older terminology is “premature ovar-ian failure or POF”) are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease.399 In other words, there is an inverse relationship between the risk of cardiovascular disease and the age of menopause.400 Endothelial function in women with POI is impaired, as measured by dilation of the brachial artery in response to blood flow, a response known to be mediated by estrogen-modulated endothelial nitric oxide.401,402 This associ-ation between endothelial dysfunction and hypoestrogenemia is reinforced by the observation that endothelial dysfunction in women with POF was improved by hormone therapy.401

An important contribution to the gender difference in cardiovascular disease prevalence and age of onset is the favorable effect of estrogen on important endothelial events. Vasodilatory and antithrombotic activities can be attributed to endothelial production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin, a process favorably influenced by estrogen. Hypercholesterolemia adversely affects this important endo-thelial process, and estrogen protects this important endo-thelial function in the presence of hypercholesterolemia.403 Estrogen inhibits the oxidation of LDL and also protects against the toxic effects of oxidized LDL on the endothelium. Women in the SWAN study who complained of hot flush-ing had more evidence of subclinical cardiovascular disease, such as aortic calcification, compared to those without hot flushes.404

A Chinese comparison study concluded that Chinese men and women with angiographically determined coro-nary artery disease differ in the circulating sex steroid hormone milieu, compared with age-matched healthy individuals.405 Straightforward reasoning has led investiga-tors to connect the different prevalence of coronary artery disease in men and women to the obvious differences in circulating sex steroids determined by the testicles and ovaries. The newly appreciated importance of estrogen in the premenopausal years has added strength to this con-nection. For many years, it has been generally believed that higher estrogen exposure in women protects against coro-nary artery disease, and the difference in coronary artery disease prevalence between men and women diminishes after menopause because of the loss of estrogen. At the heart of the matter is the gonadal difference between men and women.

Acute coronary events in premenopausal women occur more frequently when estrogen levels are the lowest during the menstrual cycle.406 In the national SWAN study, cardio-vascular risk factors were more favorable in women with higher levels of estrogen and less favorable in women with longer menstrual cycles.407 Even amenorrheic athletes in good physical condition have demonstrated endothelial dys-function, a condition that responded favorably to estrogen-containing oral contraceptives.408,409

In the WISE (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation) study, a study of premenopausal women undergoing coro-nary angiography for suspected myocardial infarction, cor-onary artery disease was more prevalent in those women who had low estrogen levels because of hypothalamic suppression.410 These findings are similar to the pioneer-ing studies in monkeys that demonstrated acceleration of atherosclerosis in animals with low estrogen because of stress-induced hypothalamic suppression, an effect that could be prevented by oral contraceptive treatment.411–413 Postmenopausal women studied with coronary angiogra-phy in the WISE study who had used oral contraceptives in the past had less coronary artery disease.414 In addition, premenopausal women with coronary artery disease have lower circulating levels of estrogen compared with normal women.415

Depression is a recognized risk factor for heart disease, but its contribution to premenopausal atherosclerosis is just beginning to be appreciated. Premenopausal monkeys that exhibit depressive behavior (induced by their lower social rank in a colony of animals) develop a more adverse lipid profile and an increasing degree of atherosclerosis when fed atherogenic diets.416 Premenopausal women with a history of recurrent depression and without known coronary disease are more likely to have coronary and aortic calcification, a marker for early atherosclerosis.417 The SWAN study found more aortic calcification in black women with depressive symptoms, although an association between coronary calci-fication and depression in black or white women could not be detected.418

Thus, hypoestrogenemia in the premenopausal years, whatever the cause, can increase the progression of atherosclerosis. This would include suppressed ovarian function associated with stress, depression, or intense athletic activity. The progressively deleterious effects of hypoestrogenemia include endothelial dysfunction, lower levels of HDL cholesterol, an increase in central obesity, and possibly depression. In monkeys and in women, lipid effects account for only 25–30% of the atheroprotective effects of estrogen.419,420

A vast literature has documented multiple mechanisms favorably influenced by estrogen that would inhibit the development of atherosclerosis.421 Clinicians tend to view testosterone as an estrogen opponent, and this is supported, for example, by studies such as lipid responses to testosterone that move in the opposite directions to those of estrogen.422 Both beneficial and detrimental vascular actions of testosterone have been described in in vitro and animal studies. Clinical studies in women have in general supported an association between hyperandrogenism and an increase in risk for cardiovascular disease. The lipid and lipoprotein profile in androgenized women with polycystic ovaries (who are also exposed to relatively lower estrogen levels over time) is similar to the male pattern with higher levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL cholesterol and lower levels of HDL cholesterol, and this abnormal pattern is independent of body weight.423–427 An adverse lipid and lipoprotein profile is a distinguishing feature of these patients even when body mass index (BMI), insulin, and age are controlled in case-control studies.428 Subclinical atherosclerosis can be demonstrated by carotid ultrasonography to be prevalent in premenopausal women with a history of anovulation and polycystic ovaries.429 In women undergoing coronary angiography, the prevalence of polycystic ovaries is increased, and women with polycystic ovaries have more extensive coronary atherosclerosis.430 In the Nurses’ Health Study, women with very irregular cycles compared to women with regular cycles had an adjusted increased risk of CHD.431 Thus, anovulatory women with polycystic ovaries develop risk factors for atherosclerosis and ultimately clinical disease comparable with that found in older postmenopausal women.

Given the variability in circulating sex steroid levels between individuals, between sexes, and within individu-als, we should not be surprised that random blood sam-pling does not always document meaningful differences in blood levels of gonadal steroids in men and women with coronary artery disease. Nevertheless, some cross-sectional studies have documented lower circulating testosterone levels in men with coronary artery disease and higher levels in men with a reduced risk of meta-bolic syndrome.432,433 A prospective cohort study deter-mined that lower testosterone levels were associated with an increased risk of developing metabolic syndrome in men.434 Men with heart failure demonstrate improvements in symptoms and functional capacity when treated with testosterone.435

In healthy postmenopausal women, higher androgen levels are associated with increased metabolic markers for the risk of coronary artery disease, and increasing testoster-one levels during the perimenopausal transition correlated with an increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome in the SWAN study.365,436,437 Higher testosterone levels, although still in the normal range, have also been found to correlate with a reduction in atherosclerosis progression in naturally post-menopausal women.438,439

Insummary,existing datasuggest thathighertestosterone levels within the normal physiologic range may be protective against atherosclerosis (perhaps by target tissue aromatization to estrogens), whereas elevated androgen levels above the normal range, such as in anovulatory women with polycystic ovaries, are atherogenic.

The important studies in women and monkeys reviewed above indicate that there exists an innate trajec-tory of atherosis for each individual that can be modulated by various risk factors and that the slope of this process determines the age of onset for clinical events.440 The con-tribution of premenopausal atherosclerosis to the devel-opment of clinical events highlights the important role for clinicians in aggressively promoting preventive interven-tions that can favorably change the slope of progression of atherosclerosis. An important risk factor is exposure to protective levels of estrogen at all stages of life. Conditions associated with hypoestrogenemia during the premeno-pausal years, therefore, require evaluation and treatment. There are many causes of hypoestrogenemia, and the treatments will vary according to the etiology. When indi-cated, appropriate hormone treatment can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease later in life. In addition, appro-priate interventions in insulin-resistant women with the metabolic abnormalities associated with polycystic ova-ries can reduce the risks of both cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus.

A logical continuum of this reasoning is that hormone therapy in the early postmenopausal years likewise can provide primary prevention of clinical coronary disease. The “timing hypothesis” proposes that adequate estrogen exposure prior to the onset of clinical events provides protection against cardiovascular disease (discussed in further detail under the section on Menopause Hormone Therapy). A meta-analysis of 23 randomized hormone ther-apy trials concluded that treatment reduced the risk of CHD events in younger women compared with older women (10 or more years since menopause or >60 years of age).441 This is a conclusion that is less firm now than when first proposed, because most of these trials were not designed to measure an endpoint of cardiovascular disease. However, another meta-analysis by the same authors concluded that hormone therapy reduced overall mortality in women with an average age of less than 60.442

Cardiovascular Disease: Concluding Thoughts

In the last 30 years, mortality from CHD has declined substantially in the United States. Improvements in medical and surgical care can account for some of this decline, but 60–70% of the improvement is due to timely implementation of preventive measures. Excellent data from epidemiologic studies and clinical trials demonstrate substantial contributions from strategies such as smoking cessation, blood pressure reduction, and lowering of cholesterol toward a documented decline in stroke and heart disease–related morbidity and mortality.443–445 The most effective means to lower CHD in a population is through primary prevention, especially smoking cessation and body weight reduction. While physiologic levels of estrogen are clearly relevant for maintenance of cardiovascular health, however, the impact of exogenous estrogen on cardiovascular risk in aging postmenopausal women who are remote from the FMP is not clearly delineated.446 When attempting to understand the role of estrogens on cardiovascular risk, it is important to distinguish between endogenous and exogenous estrogens. In addition, more recent work has begun assessing the role of additional reproductive hormones (i.e., FSH) as well as the relevance of vasomotor instability in itself as predictors of cardiovascular risk.446 While the loss of premenopausal estradiol levels is felt to contribute to the escalation in cardiovascular disease in postmenopausal years, the bulk of existing clinical data are “associative.” Appropriately designed studies are needed to better understand the spectrum of players (hormonal and nonhormonal) that may be relevant as causative to the processes that result in risk escalation for cardiovascular disease as women progress along the stages of reproductive aging.446
