Timing of Natural Menopause

Designating the average age of menopause has been some-what difficult. Based on cross-sectional studies, the median age was estimated to be somewhere between 50 and 52.80 These studies relied on retrospective memories and the sub-jective vagaries of the individual being interviewed. Until recently, studies with longitudinal follow-up to observe women and record their experiences as they pass through menopause were hampered by relatively small numbers. The Massachusetts Women’s Health Study provides us with data from 2,570 women.79

The median age for menopause in the Massachusetts Study was 51.3 years. Only current smoking could be iden-tified as a cause of earlier menopause, a shift of approxi-mately 1.5 years. Those factors that did not affect the age of menopause in this study included the use of oral con-traception, socioeconomic status, and marital status. Keep in mind that a median age of menopause means that only half the women have reached menopause at this age. In the classic longitudinal study by Treloar, the average age of menopause was 50.7 years, and the range that included 95% of the women was 44–56 years.81 In a survey in the Netherlands, the average age of menopause was 50.2, and in an Italian longitudinal study, it was 50.9 years.50,82

The Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN) is an ongoing, national study, recording the health of American women as they pass through the peri-menopausal transition (http://www.edc.gsph.pitt.edu/ swan/). The study began in 1994 in seven research cen-ters and enrolled 3,302 participants with five racial/ethnic groups and a variety of backgrounds for an initial cross-sectional survey. In 1996, these women began a longi-tudinal, follow-up study with extensive data collection occurring annually.

In the SWAN study, the median age of menopause was 51.4, with an earlier onset associated with current smoking, lower education, and lower socioeconomic status, whereas a later age was associated with parity and prior use of oral con-traceptives.83 In contrast, a Dutch study concluded that prior use of oral contraceptives was associated with earlier (<1 year) menopause.84 About 1% of women have been reported to experience menopause before the age of 40.85 The SWAN study reported a similar percentage of 1.1%, with a slightly higher rate in Black and Hispanic women and a lower rate of 0.5% in Chinese women and 0.1% in Japanese women.86 Hispanic women experienced menopause about 6 months earlier compared with other ethnic groups, whereas Japanese women were about 3 months later.

Two large cohorts of European women reported aver-age ages of menopause in various countries that centered around age 51 years, slightly higher in Northern Europe and slightly lower in Southern Europe.87 Some countries, like India, report an average age of menopause as much as 5 years earlier.88 In epidemiologic studies, approximately 10% of women in the general population become menopausal by the age of 45.49,50 Pedigree analysis has revealed that the genetic features of early menopause (age 40–45) and pre-mature ovarian insufficiency (POI) or failure (cessation of ovarian function occurring at an age <40) are similar and suggest a dominant pattern of inheritance through mater-nal or paternal relatives.89,90 There are two studies indicat-ing that daughters of mothers with an early menopause (before age 46) also have an early menopause, with up to 15% of women having a first-degree relative with early menopause.91–94

There is sufficient evidence to suggest that chronically undernourished women and vegetarians may experience an earlier menopause.91,95 Because of the contribution of body fat to estrogen production, thinner women experi-ence a slightly earlier menopause.96 Frequent consump-tion of alcohol is associated with a later menopause.92 This is consistent with the reports that women who con-sume alcohol have higher blood and urinary levels of estrogen.97–101

In multiple studies, there has been no correlation between age of menarche and age of menopause, with the exception of one Swedish study concluding that an earlier menarche and earlier menopause go together.50,81,91,102,103 In most studies, race, parity, and height have no influence on the age of menopause; however, three cross-sectional studies found later menopause to be associated with increasing parity.50,79,83,91,96 Two studies found that irregular menses among women in their early 40s predicts an ear-lier menopause.104,105 A French survey detected no influ-ence of heavy physical work on early menopause (before age 45).106 An earlier menopause has been reported to be associated with living at high altitudes.107,108 And most intriguing, an earlier age of menopause has been reported in left-handed women compared with right-handed women.109,110 Finally, intrauterine growth restriction in late gestation may predispose the affected female progeny to earlier menopause.111

It has been suggested, albeit inconsistently, that time to FMP may get accelerated in women undergoing pelvic surgery wherein ovarian vascular supply may get com-promised, such as following an abdominal hysterectomy. Effects of pelvic surgery on biomarkers of ovarian reserve have been examined, with mixed results. A prospective study could find no elevations of FSH within the first 2 years after surgery.112–114 Furthermore, in a cross-sectional study assessing ovarian reserve following ovarian cystectomy (for cysts other than endometriomas) and, or salpingectomy, there was no appreciable effect on ovarian reserve.115

Multiple studies have consistently documented that an earlier menopause (an average of 1.5 years earlier) is a conse-quence of smoking. There is a dose-response relationship with the number of cigarettes smoked and the duration of smok-ing.116,117 Even former smokers show evidence of an impact.87

Unlike the decline in age of menarche that occurred with an improvement in health and living conditions, most historical investigation indicates that the age of menopause has changed little since early Greek times.118,119 Others (a minority) have disagreed, concluding that the age of menopause did undergo a change, starting with an average age of about 40 years in ancient times, and in Sweden, an increase of about 1 year over a span of 80 years.103,120 If there has been a change, however, his-tory indicates that it has been minimal. Even in ancient writings, 50 years is not uncommonly cited as the age of menopause.

Sexuality, Aging, and Menopause

Sexuality is behavior that evolves and chances across the life span. It begins with birth (maybe before) and ends with death. The notion that sexuality ends with aging is inherently illogical. The need for closeness, caring, and companionship is lifelong. Old people today live longer, are healthier, have more education and leisure time, and have had their consciousness raised in regard to sexuality.

Younger people, especially physicians, underrate the extent of sexual interest in older people. In a random sam-ple of women aged 50–82 in Madison, Wisconsin, nearly one-half of the women reported an ongoing sexual rela-tionship.121 In the Duke longitudinal study on aging, 70% of men in the 67–77 age group were sexually active, and 80% reported continuing sexual interest, while 50% of all older women were still interested in sex.122 In the Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) trial, 60% of women 55–64 years old were sexually active.123 In a national sample of American men and women, the prevalence of sexual behavior declined with aging; however, 26% of indi-viduals aged 75–85 years were still sexually active.124 The prevalence of self-reported sexual problems peaks in middle-aged women, sufficient to cause distress in about 22% of U.S. women and about 12% of women aged 45–64.125 Up to 23% of menopausal women are negatively affected by decreased sexual desire.126

The decline in sexual activity with aging is influenced by culture and attitudes, as well as by nature and physiology (or hormones). As estradiol regulates serotonergic function, it can affect desire and sexual function.126 In addition, the dis-comfort resulting from vaginal dryness and tissue atrophy consequent to low estradiol levels can make coitus unwel-come, even to the point of avoidance. Thus, a significant component of decline in sexual activity in reproductively aging women can be attributed to menopausal symptoms associated with decreasing estrogen levels, a problem that is easily ameliorated by targeted treatment.

There are two main sexual changes in the aging woman. There is a reduction in the rate of production and volume of vaginal lubricating fluid, and there is some loss of vagi-nal elasticity and thickness of the epithelium. Less vaginal atrophy is noted in sexually active women than in inac-tive women; presumably, the activity maintains vaginal vasculature and circulation. The spectrum of uncomfort-able symptoms that are often described by transitioning and menopausal women with evidence of genital atrophy include a feeling of dryness and tightness, vaginal irrita-tion and burning with penetration, and postcoital spotting and soreness. Given that these symptoms are the direct result of tissue estrogen deprivation, the underlying tis-sue changes can be effectively prevented by focal estro-gen treatment. Systemic estrogen therapy may even have a positive impact on sexuality beyond effects on vaginal tissue.123 In an ancillary sexual study of the Kronos Early Estrogen Prevention Study (KEEPS)—a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial—early meno-pausal women were randomized to receive either low-dose oral conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) or transdermal estradiol (transdermal E2), over the 4 years of interven-tion, while both routes of estrogen treatment resulted in an improvement in vaginal dryness and dyspareunia,126 improvements in libido and sexual satisfaction were observed only in transdermal E2 users.126 In an Australian study assessing changes in sexual functioning during the menopausal transition, a correlation with a decline in sex-uality was demonstrated with estradiol levels, but not with testosterone levels. There are likely many important factors other than hormone levels that are relevant in determining midlife sexual function.126,127

Illness and Sex

It is not uncommon to encounter medical or surgi-cal underpinnings to disorders of sexuality. Surgical menopause (removal of both ovaries in premeno-pausal women) is probably one of the most commonly encountered iatrogenic contributors to altered sexual function. Remember that vaginal lubrication is an impor-tant physiologic sexual response, and therefore, vaginal dryness is a likely consequence following total hyster-ectomy even if the premenopausal ovaries are retained. Sexual problems are not limited, however, to surgical procedures and illnesses of the genitalia. Altered self-image such as following vulvectomy or mastectomy can also impact sexual function. However, studies have not found postmenopausal hysterectomy to have a detrimen-tal impact on sexuality.123,128

Sexual counseling, to be effective, must be provided to couples both before and after surgery. It is not unex-pected that the surgeon may not be fully capable of provid-ing this counseling. A major contribution from an older woman’s primary clinician is to arrange for competent and experienced sexual counseling. Unfortunately, most physi-cians operate on the principle that if no questions are raised, there is no problem. The expert surgeon should be grate-ful for the help of experts in psychosexual therapy. Seek out the potential for posttreatment sexual morbidity before the surgery. Assess the patient’s abilities for coping and her sense of body image. Consider the quality of the patient’s relationship, and be sensitive to the absence of a relation-ship. This entire effort may take some time. The normal state of presurgical anxiety, fear, and denial hampers good communication.

Increasing use of SSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) antidepressants is another iatrogenic contributor to female sexual dysfunction that merits attention.129

Antihypertensive agents are frequently responsible for male sexual dysfunction, but little information is available regarding female sexual function. Adrenergic blocking agents are especially noted to affect libido and potency in men. Similarly, psychotropic drugs of all categories have been associated with inhibition of sexual function. Finally, one should always suspect alcoholism when patients complain of sexual dysfunction. Androgen treatment for decreased female sexuality is discussed later in this chapter.

The two most important influences on sexual satis-faction in aging couples are the strength of relationship and the physical condition of each partner.123,124,130 The single most significant determinant of sexual activity for older women is the lack of availability of partners due to divorce or demise as women are outliving men. Given availability of a partner, the same general high or low rate of sexual activity can be maintained throughout life.4,131 Longitudinal studies indicate that the level of sexual activ-ity is more stable over time than previously suggested.132–134 Individuals who are sexually active earlier in life continue to be sexually active into old age. However, aging is associ-ated with a decline in sexual function in many women, and this decline has been documented in the years well before the FMP.135,136

HORMONE PROFILE OF MENOPAUSAL TRANSITION AND POSTMENOPAUSE

Shortly after the menopause, one can safely say that there are no remaining ovarian follicles.52,137 Eventually, there is a 10–20-fold increase in FSH and approxi-mately a 3-fold increase in LH, reaching a maximal level 1–3 years after menopause, after which there is a gradual, but slight, decline in both gonadotropins.138,139 Elevated levels of both FSH and LH at this time in life are con-clusive evidence of ovarian failure. FSH levels are higher than LH because LH is cleared from the blood so much faster (initial half-lives are about 20 minutes for LH and 3–4 hours for FSH) and perhaps because there is no specific negative feedback peptide for LH like inhibin. An aging-related decline in the gonadotropin levels in the latter years of postmenopausal life is well described and is believed to reflect aging of the pituitary gonadotro-pin–secreting cells, specifically a decrease in the ability to respond to the hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH).

After menopause, the ovary secretes primarily andro-stenedione and testosterone, but the circulating level of androstenedione after menopause is about one-half that seen prior to menopause.140 Most of this postmenopausal andro-stenedione is derived from the adrenal gland, with only a small amount secreted from the ovary, even though andro-stenedione is the principal steroid secreted by the postmeno-pausal ovary.141,142 Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEA-S), originating in the adrenal gland, decline markedly with aging; in the decade after menopause, the circulating levels of DHEA are approximately 70% less and levels of DHEA-S are about 74% less than the levels in young adult life.143,144

Testosterone production decreases by approximately 25% after menopause, but the postmenopausal ovary in most, but not all women, secretes more testosterone than the premeno-pausal ovary, at least in the first years of the postmenopausal period. With the disappearance of follicles and estrogen, the elevated gonadotropins drive the remaining tissue in the ovary to a level of increased testosterone secretion. The ovar-ian cells of origin are uncertain; presumably, the steroido-genic tissue is that which has accumulated from ovarian follicles undergoing atresia because stromal cells believed to be of mesenchymal origin lack steroidogenic capability.145 Suppression of gonadotropins with GnRH agonist or antag-onist treatment of postmenopausal women results in a significant decrease in circulating levels of testosterone, indi-cating the gonadotropin-dependent postmenopausal ovar-ian origin.146–148

The total amount of testosterone produced after menopause, however, is decreased because the amount of the primary source, peripheral conversion of androstenedione, is reduced. The early postmenopausal circulating level of androstenedione decreases approximately 62% from young adult life.143 The menopausal decline in the circulating levels of testosterone is not great, from no change in many women to as much as 15% in others.45,139,143,149,150 In an excellent longitudinal Australian study from 5 years before menopause to 7 years after menopause, the circulating levels of testosterone did not change.144 Indeed, because of a decrease in sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), this Australian study calculated an increase in free androgens. Late postmenopause may be considered as a state of relative androgen excess.

Later in the postmenopausal years, the circulating androgen levels are nearly all, if not all, derived from the adrenal gland. A careful study could detect no circulat-ing androgens in postmenopausal women (averaging 12 years distant from menopause) with complete adre-nal insufficiency and no intraovarian testosterone or androstenedione.151

The circulating estradiol level after menopause is approxi-mately 10–20 pg/mL, most of which is derived from periph-eral conversion of estrone, which in turn is mainly derived from the peripheral conversion of androstenedione.140,152,153 The circulating level of estrone in postmenopausal women is higher than that of estradiol, approximately 30–70 pg/mL (Table 17.4). The average postmenopausal production rate of estrogen is approximately 45 μg/24 h, almost all, if not all, being estrogen derived from the peripheral conversion of androgens. The androgen/estrogen ratio changes drasti-cally after menopause because of the more marked decline in estrogen, and an onset of mild hirsutism is common, reflecting this marked shift in the sex hormone ratio. With increasing postmenopausal age, a decrease can be measured in the circulating levels of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) and DHEA, whereas the circulating postmeno-pausal levels of androstenedione, testosterone, and estrogen remain relatively constant.139,140

Estrogen production by the ovaries does not continue beyond the menopause; however, estrogen levels in postmenopausal women can be significant, principally due to the extraglandular conversion of androstenedione and testosterone to estrogen. The clinical impact of this estrogen varies from one postmenopausal woman to another, depending on the degree of extraglandular production, modified by a variety of factors.

The percent conversion of androstenedione to estro-gen correlates with body weight. Increased production of estrogen from androstenedione with increasing body weight is probably due to the ability of fat to aromatize androgens. This fact and a decrease in the levels of SHBG (which results in increased free estrogen concentrations) contribute to the well-recognized association between obesity and the devel-opment of endometrial cancer. Body weight, therefore, has a positive correlation with the circulating levels of estrone and estradiol.140 Aromatization of androgens to estrogens is not limited to adipose tissue, however, because almost every tissue tested has this activity.

Eventually, the ovarian steroidogenic tissue is exhausted and, despite huge reactive increments in FSH and LH, no further steroidogenesis of importance results from gonadal activity. The postmenopausal ovary weighs less than 10 g, but it can be visualized by ultrasonography.155 With increas-ing age, the adrenal contribution of precursors for estrogen production proves inadequate. In this final stage of estrogen availability, levels are insufficient to sustain secondary sex tissues, such as the genitourinary epithelium (Figure 17.9).

In summary, the symptoms frequently seen and related to decreasing ovarian follicular competence and then estrogen loss in this protracted climacteric are:

• Disturbances in menstrual pattern, including anovula-tion and reduced fertility, decreased flow or hypermenor-rhea, irregular frequency of menses, and then, ultimately, amenorrhea

• Vasomotor instability (hot flushes and sweats)

• Atrophic conditions: atrophy of the vaginal epithelium; formation of urethral caruncles; dyspareunia and pruri-tus due to vulvar, introital, and vaginal atrophy; general skin atrophy; and urinary difficulties such as urgency and abacterial urethritis and cystitis

• Health problems secondary to long-term deprivation of estrogen: the consequences of osteoporosis and cardio-vascular disease

A precise understanding of the symptom complex the individual patient may display is often difficult to achieve. Some patients experience severe multiple reactions that may be disabling. Others show no reactions or minimal reactions that go unnoticed until careful medical evaluation.

It is helpful to classify the hormonal problems in three categories:

1.	Those associated with relative estrogen excess such as abnormal uterine bleeding, endometrial hyperplasia, and endometrial cancer

2.	Those associated with estrogen deprivation such as flushes, atrophic vaginitis, urethritis, and osteoporosis

3.	Those associated with hormone therapy (discussed later in this chapter)

