MENOPAUSAL HORMONE THERAPY

There is little question that estrogen is the most effective of available remedies for women who suffer from both-ersome vasomotor symptoms such as hot flushes and night sweats or from consequences of atrophy of repro-ductive tract tissues that naturally follows cessation of ovarian function; these benefits of estrogens have been long recognized. In the 1990s, however, based on accru-ing observational studies and a rationale that was driven by biologic plausibility, the focus of postmenopausal hor-mone therapy changed from short-term use in the man-agement of symptom burden to long-term utilization as a preventative strategy against common diseases and disor-ders of aging including cardiovascular disease, dementia, and osteoporosis. HT was found to be very effective in treating vasomotor symptoms. Similarly, skeletal ben-efits in preventing osteoporosis were also clear. However, long-term use of HT for the sole purpose of targeting cardiovascular disease and dementia was challenged by a sequence of seminal clinical trial, with WHI being at the forefront. Not only did the clinical trial data indicate that HT did not protect against cardiovascular disease, nor mitigate the risk of aging-related dementia, but, on the contrary, raised concerns regarding the potential for harm as evident in an increased risk of thrombotic phenomenon, stroke, and breast cancer. In WHIMS (Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study), incidence of cognitive deterioration was higher in the hormone-using postmenopausal women compared to those assigned to placebo. The ensuing decades following publication of WHI findings witnessed passionate and widespread quests attempting to unravel potential mechanisms that could explain HT-related harm; for a brief period, the field of menopause was rendered complex and decision-making by clinicians and patients very difficult. In this section of the chapter, we offer a comprehensive review of the literature, including more recent data and analyses, to help serve as a guide for the practicing clinician caring for menopausal women.

History447–450

The existence of hormones was unknown 200 years ago. In the last half of the 19th century, a scattering of chemists and physiologists began to produce hormon-ally active extracts from glands, bile, and urine of ani-mals. Adventuresome clinicians used these extracts to treat patients, for example, supplying thyroid hormone to treat severely hypothyroid individuals, and the specialty of endocrinology was born. The word “endocrine” was adopted to designate the “glands of internal secretion,” the multiple sources of hormones.

Charles-Édouard Brown-Séquard, the son of a French woman and an American sea captain, was born on the island of Mauritius. Speaking fluent English and French, he practiced medicine and lectured in London and New York before settling in Paris. Brown-Séquard reported in 1889 that he was rejuvenated by the self-administration of extracts from dog testicles, most likely a placebo effect considering the scant amount of testosterone he could have extracted using his aqueous method, and he suggested that ovarian extracts would have the same revitalizing effect in women. Efforts to treat women around the end of the 19th century were largely unsuccessful, but in 1897, ovar-ian extract was reported to be effective for menopausal hot flushing.451

The first American attempt to treat menopausal symp-toms is attributed to E.L. Severinghaus and J. Evans of Madison, Wisconsin, who in 1929 administered a deriva-tive from the amniotic fluid of cattle.448,452 In the 1930s, the ovarian hormones were isolated, and the “estrin” products and the synthetic estrogens, stilbestrol and ethinyl estradiol, were administered to menopausal women. Edgar Allen and Edward Doisy were the first to isolate the ovarian hormone, estrogen. In 1923 and 1924, Allen and Doisy reported the isolation from pig ovaries and the administration to animals of “an ovarian hormone.”

In 1926, Sir Alan S. Parkes and C.W. Bellerby coined the basic word “estrin” to designate the hormone or hormones that induce estrus in animals, the time when female mammals are fertile and receptive to males. Doisy and his students Veler and Thayer in St. Louis isolated a milligrams of estrogen in crystalline form in 1929 from large amounts of urine from pregnant women. The ter-minology was extended to include the principal estro-gens in humans, estrone, estradiol, and estriol, in 1932 at the first meeting of the International Conference on the Standardization of Sex Hormones in London, although significant amounts of pure estradiol were not isolated until 1936. At this same meeting, the pioneering chem-ists were bemoaning the problem of scarcity that limited supplies to milligram amounts when a relatively unknown biochemist, A. Girard from France, offered 20 g of crystal-line estrogen derived by the use of a new reagent to treat mare’s urine.453

In the 1920s, George W. Corner at the University of Rochester invited Willard Myron Allen, an organic chemist who was then a medical student, to join him in the study of the corpus luteum. Within 2 years, they had a pure extract, but it was not until 1934 that crystalline progesterone was isolated almost simultaneously in several countries. It took the corpora lutea of 50,000 pigs to yield a few milligrams. At the Second International Conference on the Standardization of Sex Hormones in London, Corner and Allen proposed the name progestin. Others proposed luteosterone, and, at a cocktail party, the various biochemists agreed to call the chemical progesterone.453

Hormones were being administered to patients in the 1940s, but supplies were very limited. And with a scarce supply, hormones were incredibly expensive. Progesterone, for example, cost $200 per gram. “To secure barely enough androsterone to cover the head of a pin, Adolph Butenandt had had to start with nearly four thousand gallons of urine; to obtain less than one hundredth of an ounce of pure tes-tosterone crystals, Ernst Laqueur had had to process nearly a ton of bulls’ testicles. It took a full ton of cholesterol, from the spinal cords or brains of cattle or from the grease of sheep’s wool, to yield just twenty pounds of the start-ing material from which progesterone ultimately could be obtained. Edward Doisy had had to process the ovaries of more than 80,000 sows to get just 12,000ths of a gram of estradiol.”454

In the 1930s, the Ayerst Company was extracting estro-gens from the urine of pregnant women. Limited by the problems of supply, low activity, and bad taste and odor, Gordon A. Grant, head of biochemistry for Ayerst, sug-gested in 1939 that they use urine from horses. The process produced sodium salts from the sulfate esters of the vari-ous estrogens, yielding a water-soluble conjugate. Premarin (conjugated estrogens) was approved in Canada in 1941 and in the United States in 1942 for the treatment of symptoms associated with menopause.455 The tablets were and are still designated as variations of 1.25 mg, based on the equiva-lent amounts of Premarin and estrone (1.25 mg) that could produce the same effect in the Allen-Doisy bioassay (amount required to produce an increase in rat uterine weight). It was not until 1972 that the first quantitative analysis of Premarin was performed, based on gas chromatography. Modern studies indicate that there is a large number of steroids in Premarin, even androgens and progestins, but only the 10 estrogens are present in sufficient quantity to have clinical effects (Table 17.7).

ESTROGEN FORMULATIONS AND ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION

Oral Administration

The relative potencies of commercially available estrogens are of great importance when prescribing estrogen, and the clinician should be familiar with the following potencies (Table 17.8).
